Che Selane is the ANCYL Limpopo Provincial Secretary, he writes in his activist personal capacity. The ANC 54th National Conference in Nasrec acknowledged a variety of objective and subjective factors which made it impossible to seriously pursue the agenda for a radical socio-economic transformation. This was because the balance of forces in the country were not in favour of the liberation movement. The ANC has made a commitment to make a detailed assessment of the dynamics of the African continent and to strengthen the global analysis on geopolitics, multi-literalism and economy, including trade dynamics. With these realities, the ANC led government might not implement some of the resolutions for a radical socio-economic transformation. This is because the colonial enterprises vowed to sabotage any program that seek to develop peripheral countries. The mining industries are on the verge of collapse and some have collapsed because we never had a plan for such terrible and unfortunate incidences. The land is still in the hands of the few and the ANC government failed to deliver at least 30% of the land to the rightful owners. Banks continue to collude and threaten the existing operation of the economy and the ANC government took a decision for the state to establish its own bank. Other strategic and monopoly industries are not yet nationalised and such decision is in black and white for implementation. It would not be for the first time to experience nationalisation of the mines in a global context. In fact, nationalisation happened in some of the core and peripheral countries. In South Africa, it must happen when the ANC is not only the legal leader of the state, but a legitimate leader of government. The ANC government is in an appropriate position to lead and implement radical socio-economic transformation. In countries like Botswana the state owns 50% of the mines and private companies own 50% in a public-private partnership arrangement as in Debswana (De Beers & Botswana government). The revenue generated out of partnership in the mines benefits the people of Botswana through investment in education and other means necessary to uplift their socio-economic conditions. This is a clear demonstration that the government of Botswana is committed to the people. Despite the fact that we have nothing to prove on the development and productivity of this mining industries, the ANC can be seen as betraying people. The ANC as the leader of the state; must own and control at least 40% and private companies 60% so that we fund free education and invest in infrastructure. If we own 40% of the mineral resources, we will put profit generated out of these mineral resources to invest in the sovereign national wealth or assets for future generation. The establishment of the state owned bank is the epicentre for radical socio-economic transformation. This bank must save the revenue generated out of the activities which are happening in the monopoly industries. The ANC led government should be worried if the bank in South Africa decides to withdraw or stop conducting business with the country. It means that our people will be vulnerable without trust or hope to our government and its leadership. There is nothing to deter the state to establish its own bank. In 2008, the Netherlands took a decision to nationalise ABN AMBRO bank. The nationalisation prevented serious instability in the financial sector and the economy. It also safeguarded the interests of account holders and when it took over ABN AMRO, the state always said it was a temporary measure because of the environment that the state found itself in at the time. However, the state had to ensure that the financial sector had to be sufficiently stable. This is the intervention the South African government led by the ANC can make, nationalise or establish its own bank for the future of South Africans. The ANC leadership must have the political will to expropriate land without compensation. The recent trajectory for amendment of section 25 of the constitution to enable expropriation of land without compensation is an honest and a direct response to the demand of the people. In short, the state must own and control land and anyone who needs the land must apply and state reasons why they need the land. The Thuma-Mina or send me campaign program must never be projected as a publicity exercise, but a project that intends to galvanise our people for the purpose of restoring hope and confidence in the ANC. Thuma-Mina must unlock the bottlenecks created by the colonial-apartheid enterprise. Our people remain landless and suffer whilst we have vast and rich tracts land lying idle. Just like Moses led the children of Israel led the people out of bondage, President Cyril Ramaphosa has such a mission to take South Africa out of political bondage through initiatives such Thuma-Mina. The ANC remains the only hope for the people’s economic emancipation in their lifetime, and in it they trust. The Thuma-Mina campaign must be the plank upon which the ANC 54th national conference resolutions on radical socio-economic transformation find concrete expression. It will be politically wrong and incorrect to characterise or define the Thuma-Mina Campaign Project as a PR exercise for President Ramaphosa without substantively looking at the ideological basis of the campaign. The Project aimed at defining the acceptance of the mandate given by the people of South Africa, through the ANC 54th National Conference to implement the conference resolution. President Ramaphosa is the chosen one to deliver the people of South Africa from neo-colonial slavery to a dispensation of freedom and democracy. It will be dubious if the National Executive Committee of the ANC were to renege from implementing the people’s mandate. A detailed assessment of political dynamics does not mean that leaders must cowardly betray the peoples’ demands, because the people will show them their true colours during elections. Leaders must do what the people need. Leaders must not behave like Biblical-Jonas who was sent on clear mission, but went astray. The ANC is the people’s movement and must always act in a manner consistent with the needs and aspirations. Failure will culminate in the loss of interest and hope in the organisation with consequence of poor electoral performance.