PIET RAMPEDI PRESIDENT Cyril Ramaphosa has placed the entire North West Province under administration as he cracks the whip and tries to restore calm in the embattled platinum belt. The takeover has seen two-thirds of the province’s municipalities and put them under the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs. The move comes as North West premier Supra Mahumapelo digs in his heels over calls for his resignation and subsequent leave of absence from work. Ramaphosa has written to the National Council of Provinces, informing it that he is placing the entire North West government under the control of the national executive in terms of section 100 (1) of the constitution. A task team has also been established to oversee everything and it is led by Minister in the Presidency Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma. Parliamentary spokesman Moloto Mothapo confirmed that NCOP chairperson Thandi Modise had received Ramaphosa’s letter saying North West would be put under national control for 180 days in terms of the section 100 (1) of the constitution. “The Office of Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces Ms Thandi Modise received communication on Friday, 11 May, from the President of the Republic notifying the House of Cabinet’s decision to invoke Section 100 (1) of the Constitution to address challenges facing the North West Province,” he said. “The Constitution states that, when a province cannot or does not fulfil an executive obligation in terms of the Constitution or legislation, the national executive may intervene by taking any appropriate steps to ensure fulfillment of that obligation.” The province has seen violent protests as calls for Mahumapelo to step down have gained momentum. There have been allegations of fraud and corruption levelled against him. Mothapo said Modise would table the President’s letter through Parliament’s official publication, Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports (ATC), for the attention of Members of Parliament. He said the matter would follow an ordinary course of parliamentary procedure, which includes it being referred to a committee or committees of the House for processing. “As enjoined by the Constitution, the National Council of Provinces must independently conduct its own assessment that the National Executive observed all procedures and circumstances for the intervention and must make a determination within 180 days,” he said. Ramaphosa is due to meet the North West African National Congress and Mahumapelo this week.