SAVIOUS KWINIKA African Times News Digital Edition | www.africantimesnews.co.za | @AfricanTimesSA SOUTH Africa’s main opposition – Democratic Alliance (DA) has rejected media reports that the City of Johannesburg is financially troubled after spending money on forensic investigations into alleged corruption by the past administration. The DA, which is led by Mayor Herman Mashaba, took over the reins of the country’s economic hub in 2016, succeeding the governing African National Congress (ANC). Media reported at the weekend that the city was ‘cash-strapped’ and ‘heading for a bailout’. Refiloe Nt’sekhe, DA National Spokesperson, denounced the reports as “false and a misrepresentation of the city’s finances.” “The new DA-led administration has worked tirelessly to stabilise finances and this intervention is already yielding positive results,” Nt’sekhe said. Without disclosing figures, she said the city’s revenue collection drive, Operation Buya Mthetho, saw in of 1st May the highest revenue collection months in Johannesburg’s history. “This can be directly attributed to a team of highly skilled professionals in the city, who are putting the interests of residents first as part of a fruitful turnaround plan.” DA is pursuing 3 500 corruption cases in the city. Nt’sekhe justified the fight against alleged corruption, which she blamed for the country’s “skyrocketing” unemployment rate, which currently stands at 9,5 million. She said despite the money lost to alleged ANC corruption, the city still had a balance of R3,279 billion. “This will be carefully managed as we continue to provide quality services,” the opposition spokesperson said. She expressed confidence Johannesburg would attract much-needed investment to improve the city in order to create more jobs for residents and maintain its reputation as one of Africa’s economic powerhouses. “The City of Johannesburg will continue to prioritise its citizens through efficient service delivery and a pro-poor agenda that will lift its people out of poverty.” – CAJ News