PRESIDENT Cyril Ramaphosa’s cabinet shake-up is welcomed and long overdue but it leaves much to be desired. The cabinet harbours old people and does not represent the youth. In a country where the majority of the population is made up of people under the age of 35 years, the new cabinet does not pay homage to that. It is actually painting a picture of a country with no youth leaders of substance. It also fails to pave the way for the future generation of leaders that will take over once the exile generation relinquishes power. If that is the message being sent out there, then we are a nation in trouble. A futureless nation that will remain in the hands and grip of people who should have retired. We should be taking notes from countries such as France where people in their 30’s are elected to the highest office in the land. The African National Congress has a Veterans League, where the prerequisite for one to become a member they need to be above 60 years of age. That organisation seems to be robbed of members. Those that qualify to serve there appear to be competing with the youth of the country to serve in office. It is not wrong to have experienced people serve in an organisation, but we can’t have all leadership positions occupied by them. It is not wrong for those leaders to serve in the background and be advisers, we actually want to see that happening. Their wisdom and knowledge are needed but it can’t be the only thing that matters in leadership. The world is becoming youthful, the challenges faced are understood better by the youth, the people that are actually going through hardships. We speak of youth unemployment, creating an enabling environment for young people to become employers and not employees. How do you expect the youth to relate to an individual who is two times their age talking about things that affect them? How would that individual know what the youth is going through when he/she is not experiencing them? The youth of South Africa need people who will be on their level, people who will speak their lingo, go to the same places they go to. It’s sad that we would rather recycle ministers instead of injecting youthfulness into government. We understand that some of the individuals that were brought back excelled in their departments, but a breath of fresh air is needed. A new broom still sweeps better than that one which has been in storage for years. We will forgive the president for this round, we understand that he had to strike a balance between pleasing those who backed him and the losing camp for the sake of unity. We hope during the next reshuffle we will see half of the cabinet consist of young people who will bring fresh ideas to resolve the many challenges facing the country.