Zara Nijzink-Laurie presents research in Taiwan on menstural cups. DION HENRICK SHE may only be a teenager and fresh from primary school but this Grade 8 learner from Cape Town already has the global science world at her feet. Zara Nijzink-Laurie, a learner from the Rustenburg High School in the Mother City (Cape Town) might indeed bear a mouthful of a name and unfamiliar among her compatriots but will in the foreseeable future certainly be on every South African’s lips if a breakthrough in Taiwan is anything to go by. Nijzink-Laurie, who doubles as an advocate for the rights of her peers, has made a huge impression at the just-ended Taiwan International Science Fair, home second prize in the behavioural and social sciences category, through research that delves into one of the most emotive subjects in the developing world. She was selected to go to Taiwan thanks to her impressive research into the barriers to the use of the menstrual cup among schoolgirls. Nijzink-Laurie was motivated to look at this issue when she heard estimates that 2 million young South African women miss several days of school each month due to a lack of access to sanitary products. “My project investigates the awareness of the menstrual cup and barriers to using it among schoolgirls. Although menstrual cups are cheaper and more environmentally-friendly than pads or tampons, they are not widelyknown or used,” she explained. Nijzink-Laurie’s project involved conducting research among young women in grades 8 and 11 at a local school. Participants were asked to complete a questionnaire before and after watching a video about the menstrual cup. Her research showed that 54 percent of the younger girls and 92 percent of the older girls had heard of the cup but in each group only one girl had used it. About 11 percent of younger girls and 40 percent of older girls would consider using the cup. Her research found that there were a range of barriers to using the cup and to address these issues requires more than just dissemination of information. Nijzink-Laurie is delighted with her performance in Taiwan and the experience of presenting at an international fair of this calibre. “I am excited that a topic so close to my heart has gained recognition from such prestigious quarters,” the young scientist beamed. The Taiwan International Science Fair is an annual event in which learners from over 23 countries and territories participate. Nijzink-Laurie selected to represent South Africa following her outstanding projects she presented at the Eskom Expo for Young Scientists International Science Fair in Johannesburg in October last year. Kalsee Nadasen was another participant from the country.Some 600 of South Africa’s future engineers, chemists, physicists, mathematicians and innovators took part in the country’s largest school-level science fair. Parthy Chetty, Executive Director of the Eskom Expo, hopes Nijzink- Laurie’s recognition at international level spurs her on to develop her research further. “We need more research into an issue like this and we hope that Zara will one day be able to implement the interventions necessary to shift behaviour among schoolgirls,” Chetty said. Competing at an international science fair is always an exciting and challenging experience that offers great learning opportunities, said Pieter Pretorius, Chairman of the Board of Directors, Eskom Expo or Young Scientists. “To succeed at an international level, among such stiff competition is a major achievement and a testament to the value of Zara’s research. We hope that this is just the beginning of a long career in the sciences for Zara,” Pretorius said. – CAJ News