Residents don’t want to vote under the Collins Chabane Municipality. BUKUTA NKUNA TROUBLE seems to be brewing in Vuwani as community leaders threaten to boycott the 2019 general elections if their issues are not resolved. The threats come after the realisation that they would be voting under the Collins Chabane Municipality. According to the Pro-Makhado Task Team, they were never informed by the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) that they would fall under the municipality. Pro-Makhado MunicipalityTask Teamspokesperson NsovoSambo.Picture: LebogangMakwela / VisualBuzz SA Pro-Makhado Task Team spokesperson Nsovo Sambo said: “We have asked them several times about this matter but they have failed to respond. If you log on to their website, it shows all the information of LIM345 (currently Collins Chabane Municipality). So that is why people said that they’re not going to participate.” The community has been involved in a running feud with the provincial government over dermacations. He said despite previous engagements with the provincial government over services in the area, their regional offices remained closed and that dumpsters continued to hog dirt. “So far we have informed COGHSTA formally of our timelines and the issues we want addressed because we need a road map over the issue of demarcation in terms of how are they going to deal with it? We also want clarity on whether the offices in Vuwani are operational or not. We want them to come and tell us what is happening with cleaners because they have all been removed within the area of Vuwani but we have heard from people that they are in LIM345,” said Sambo. He said the community was willing to abandon the right to vote if their issues were not resolved. Despite the threats, IEC spokesperson Kate Bapela assured community members that the matter was being handled by their provincial offices. She said those who want to check their addresses and register new ones should head to voting stations. “Such matters are normally dealt with by our provincial offices because they are the ones that will consult and discuss with them how they plan. This is an address harvest. “We are looking for the addresses of people but obviously we are not going to turn away people who are willing to register. There are going to be consultative processes which are going to happen at a provincial level,” she said. Bapela said they were aware of the hostilities in the area but she urged community members to cooperate with authorities.