A sultry voice that evokes emotions you never thought you had, makes you gather and rediscover yourself when listening to it, that is Vuyokazi Tshaya. She is an artist who with her last offering in a form of a five track Extended Play (EP) record, titled Vuka, managed to completely blow listeners away. After intriguing fans with her work, she is now teaming up with award winning vocalist and Zimbabwean born George Munetsi for what she said will bring back the memories of Brenda Fassie. The two, collaborating under the banner of Iduna production, have come up with a cheeky entitled song ‘Dololo’, meaning unworthy or null. The song infuses Zulu and Shona lyrics and explores a relationship of inequalities, where a successful female is in love with a broke man and has to validate and reassure him of the commitment to their relationship. “It’s one of those songs that have the hallmarks of a timeless wedding or party classics. It’s in the genre of Afro pop which we seem to have moved away from just for the sake of it and yet at wedding and parties we still dance to these kind of tunes and most of those songs are old. So here’s a new one to spice up your old collection of wedding party tunes,” said Munetsi. He recently left Kaya FM after 20 years. On being quizzed why he decided to leave Kaya the radio presenter turned muso said that he had reached his ceiling in radio and it was a time to leave and go make a success of other ventures, like his music. “I am working on an album, or should I say I have been working on one for the past I don’t know how many years,” he said. The duet of Dololo also coincides with both artists working on full albums. Munetsi’s album was launched early September and we wait with bated breath for the release of Tshaya’s album in the next couple of months. Tshaya could not hide her excitement about working with Munetsi on this project. “No words can describe how great it has been, not only have we recorded the song together with Georgie but we have been performing it and the energy I get from just performing the song with him is so amazing,” said Tshaya. She also believes that the song is relevant in these days as real love should not be measured by a fat bank account. “The love that our grandparents had still exists. Love conquered all then, hence the low divorce rate. With Dololo we want to relive all this,” continued Tshaya.