Former president faces 16 fraud and corruption charges. RUSSEL MOLEFE FORMER President Jacob Zuma has a date with destiny after he was served with summons to appear in court. The Hawks this week confirmed that Zuma needs to appear in court on April 6 to face justice. His lawyer Michael Hulley has confirmed receipt of the summons but indicated they would be challenging the decision to charge Msholozi. “I confirm that the summons has been received and that we are preparing an application to review the NDPP’s decision to prosecute,” Hulley said. Zuma faces 16 fraud and corruption charges related to the arms deal. Hawks spokesperson Brigadier Hangwani Mulaudzi would not comment on Zuma’s appeal but confirmed the State was ready to proceed with his case. He said all the matters would be ventilated in court. “It is their job on April 6 to prove that the decision to charge him lacks merit but the accused will be formally charged,” said Mulaudzi. Zuma has been under a barrage of attacks since he was pushed to resign as head of state. Despite his messy removal from the highest office, he has maintained that he would continue to do what his party wants. He was out and about campaigning for the party during the voter registration weekend but his organisation is set to leave him in the cold as he fights this battle. The party announced over the weekend that it does not want to see ANC paraphernalia outside court when Zuma appears. ANC Secretary-General Ace Magashule addressing the media during a post NEC meeting on the recall of President Jacob Zuma at the anc’s headquarters Luthuli House in central Johannesburg on Tuesday 13 February 2018, South Africa***Photo Visual Buzz SA ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule said those wanting to support Zuma should do so in their personal capacity and not through the structures of the movement. “Individual members of the ANC and society have the right to express their sympathy and solidarity with the affected persons in their individual capacity, and not through any structures of the movement including the ANC leagues and the MKMVA. Members involved in such actions are discouraged from displaying ANC paraphernalia and thus creating the false impression that the ANC as an organisation identifies with, or approves of, the misdemeanours of which any member or leader may be accused,” he said. The request however appears to have fallen on deaf ears. Some party members have indicated they would wear their regalia to support him. Andile Lungisa has spoken out about his support for Zuma. He said he can’t be expected to suspend his membership in order to support Zuma. “I will go to court as a member of the ANC, wearing ANC regalia and my membership card will be in my pocket. When you go there, you don’t cease to be a member, because you are going to court. We must be rational when we take decisions,” he said. The ANC Youth League in Kwa-Zulu Natal said it has started mobilising support for the embattled former president. Provincial chairperson Kwazi Mshengu said the league had started mobilising its own structures and others within the party that want to support Zuma. “We are engaging the different structures in the organisation and the different societies. We had discussions with charismatic church leaders who have expressed their willingness to come on board, and next week we are going to develop a clear programme on how we are going to mobilise,” he said. The South African Communist Party (SACP) which was championing Zuma’s recall leading to the party’s elective conference in December has called on the ANC to exclude Zuma from its electoral campaigns. “It will be in its favour as well in our favour if he is not taking part in the electoral platforms‚” said SACP deputy general secretary Solly Mapaila. Zuma has extra motivation to win his court battle and to challenge Abrahams. Should he lose, he will have to foot his R15 million legal bill. President Ramaphosa confirmed in a response to a Parliamentary question by the Economic Freedom Fighters that legal costs in the Spy Tapes came to R15.3-million. He said government was paying the fees because the allegations stem from when he was a government official. “The acts on the basis of which it is alleged that the former President committed criminal offences took place during his tenure as a government official both at provincial and later at national level. “In addition‚ the Department of Justice considered Section 12.2.2 of the then applicable Treasury Regulations‚ issued in terms of the Public Finance Management Act‚ 1999‚ read with Section 3(1) of the State Attorney Act‚ as providing for an obligation to refund the state if any loss was found to be incurred when an official was acting outside the course and scope of his employment. “For this reason‚ the State Attorney decided that it was appropriate to grant the request of the former President‚ subject to the condition that he make an undertaking (which he did) to refund monies thus spent should it be found that he acted in his personal capacity and own interest in the commission of the alleged offences‚” he said.