Veteran actor is very excited about SAFTA win. MASHUDU SADIKE HE is popularly known for his role as the bad guy Banzi in the Mzansi Magic soapie Isithembiso and Hamilton Dlamini who has just scooped a coveted award for his role says he enjoys playing the mean character. Dlamini, 50, won the Golden Horn Award for best actor in the soapie/ telenovela category at the South African Film and Television Awards (SAFTAS) for his role as Banzi recently. The awards were held last weekend at Sun City’s Super Bowl. The father of three from Sebokeng in the Vaal Triangle has won many awards including in film and theatre. But he could not hide his excitement at bagging this recent accolade. “I expected to win the SAFTA because I worked hard in that role and my audience on social media confirmed that I deserved it. In my heart I had already won it before the event itself,” Dlamini told African Times. For him, being an artist is a passion and a calling, like being a traditional healer. Dlamini believes this is a gift in which you need to get into character and be that object, you can act as a dog, a cat or a fish convincingly if you own it. Dhlamini says that he had to hang out with bad guys to be able to master that character. “I enjoy playing bad guys because I then I have to spend most of my time with bad guys, trying to find out what converts them into being bad people,” he said with enthusiasm. “I recall from a long list of bad people I have spent time with and rehearsed them to perfection. With Isithembiso I was exploring those with thin voices. I also watched the film The Godfather many times to perfect the role played by Marlon Brando as I thought the role falls under the same category,” he said. He praised the organizers of the awards for recognizing raw talent in the industry as that was hard to come by. “The awards are growing every year, they do not have a money prize but they offer opportunities because all the broadcasters, producers and directors gather to hunt for new young talent. “The awards are now dignified especially after being moved to Sun City,” he said. Dhlamini did confess that his first love is theatre as it’s where he practiced how to be a disciplined actor, gained confidence and learned how to respect other performers. However, he believes that challenges in the theatre industry are many including that fellow black actors do not want to invest in the business and they always want to be employed when they could create work and produce it from their pockets. He says that black actors would rather buy expensive clothes, whiskeys, cellphones and cars than invest in Africa by telling their stories. Dhlamini is also featuring as a lead character in what is said to be South Africa’s first western movie called Five Fingers For Marseilles that opens in cinemas across the country on the 6th of April. “We had fun working on Five fingers. The environment on set was lovely, we accommodated one another in tough weather conditions. I love the final product and I am proud of it,” Dhlamini said. While he continues to be the bad guy on Isithembiso his next projects include taking the theatre play Woza Albert written by Percy Mtwa and Mbongeni Ngema to Zimbabwe’s Intwasa festival in September and produce more theatre. “I want to unpack the shelves of theatre plays by writers who never had an opportunity to tell African stories on mainstream stages because of Apartheid. I want to buy rights and give them to our brave youth of today to play and direct them,” said Dlamini. He believes that productions by such prolific black playwrights as Matsemela Manaka, Dr Mbongeni Ngema, John Ledwaba, Mlungisi Ka Mase, Percy Mtwa, Gibson Kente, Sam Mhangwani, Paul Rapetsoa, Khaba Mkhize and many others should be revived and put out to the public. – Mukurukuru Media.