Some are arguing that the ruling party does not need him. RUSSEL MOLEFE THE clarion call for Julius Malema to return to the African National Congress is rubbing some party members the wrong way. Some are arguing that the ruling party does not need him. This comes after ANC president Cyril Ramaphosa and his deputy David Mabuza urged the former youth league to come back home over the weekend. One of those not entertaining the idea is Chairperson Gwede Mantashe who many see as the architect of Malema’s expulsion from the party. Mantashe who is now the Minerals Resources Minister said such calls should not be made in public and he should not be approached but he should rather make the decision on his own. “My own view is that if Julius wants to come to the ANC he must come to the ANC. I don’t think we should go out there inviting him,” Mantashe said. Mabuza who during the lead up to the party’s elective conference in December managed to convince members of the Bushbuckridge Residents Association to return to the party said he would take it upon himself to convince Malema to reconsider going back to the ANC. Mabuza said Malema had a special space in his heart. He said he supported Malema’s campaign to become ANC Youth League president. “We had times together. He knows. When he was in the ANC‚ I supported him to be the president of the Youth League and I remember comrade Julius saying: My blood is black‚ green and gold. I will never leave the ANC,” Mabuza said. Mantashe did not mince his words when he said making such a public invite was a recipe for disaster as it allowed Malema the opportunity to publicly turn them down, giving him more ammunition against the party. “I think we should not go about asking people to come back. Because when you do that you give them an opportunity to reject that offer though they want it deep down in their heart. And my own view is that, let’s not do it all the time,” he said. His fears were proved correct when the leader of the Economic Freedom Fighters turned down the offer. Malema took to social media to say he would never return to the organisation. He tweeted: “I won’t do it, that thing is dead. Worse they now have two presidents, one for ANC of Natal called Zupta and Ramapostponer for the rest and now I must go and join the confusion, never.” Other party members echoed Mantashe’s views. Many took to social media to express disappointment with the call. The Youth League’ Tshwane Chairperson Lesego Makhubela said the call was necessitated by the lack of fire power within the youth league. “What the Deputy President simply meant is that he misses the days of a vibrant, radical, militant and focused ANC YL which drives national discourse and has its finger on the pulse on all issues whether it’s Vat increase, whether it’s independent power producers, 4th Industrial Revolution, state capture, youth unemployment or even free education. “What the Deputy president Cde David Mabuza is yearning for is the return of that youth league,” Makhubela said. “We must make sure that this year the President and the Deputy President, the youth of South Africa, Africa and the World are granted the youth league of Peter Mokaba, Sindiso Magaqa, Ronald Lamola, George Masango, Fikile “Vutha” Mbalula, Vuyiswa Tulelo, Potlako Lebello, AP Mda, Mzala Nxumalo, Mxolisi Majombozi, Ting Ting Masango and many others. When this has been done by June we won’t be making any further public invites,” he added. Zwelo Masilela, ANC member from Mpumalanga, blasted the calls. He said the top leadership should stop annointing leaders. “The call by ANC leaders who ostracized it’s autonomy and voice by expelling leaders and disbanding the ANCYL and those who handpicked mute stooges to lead us can’t be the ones who today call for the return of Julius. “The ANC leadership must stop anointing ANCYL leadership that will hold onto their personal skirts and trousers but allow the youth membership to autonomously elect leadership that will be glued to the masses of our poor youth and in pursuit of the twin tasks,” he said.