Nelson Mandela Bridge links old and new. The Constitutional Court. THE Nelson Mandela Bridge is located at the heart of downtown Johannesburg, a gleaming apex in the city sky. The area is part of a massive rejuvenation drive, filled with sites of cultural and historic significance – and the bridge is the conduit for all traffic to and from the area. Of the many buildings, roads, squares and bays named after the first democratically elected president of South Africa, the Nelson Mandela Bridge is the most fitting tribute to this great man. Of the many buildings, roads, squares and bays named after the first democratically elected president of South Africa, the Nelson Mandela Bridge is the most fitting tribute to this great man. Mary Fitzgerald Square. This Johannesburg landmark symbolically links the old and new as it ushers traffic into the heart of rejuvenated downtown Johannesburg. The Nelson Mandela Bridge, which cost R38 million, is the largest cable-stayed bridge in southern Africa. The vast quantities of construction materials that went into its creation underpin what a feat of engineering it is. It took 4 000 cubic meters of concrete, 1 000 tons of structural steel and 500 tons of construction steel to realise the seemingly weightless pinnacle that gleams with the promise of the new. The bridge is 284 meters long, 42 meters high at the north pylon and 27 meters high at the south pylon. It accommodates two lanes of traffic in either direction, as well as reserved lanes for pedestrians and cyclists. The University of the Witwatersrand. Rumbling beneath are over 40 train tracks as the bridge is located in the commuter hub of Johannesburg. The bridge links the Newtown Cultural Precinct – home to Mary Fitzgerald Square, the historic Market Theatre, Museum Africa and Gramadoelas Restaurant – with lower Braamfontein, another site of renewal encompassing the Constitutional Court, The University of the Witwatersrand and The Civic Theatre. This landmark in Johannesburg was constructed as part of the ongoing BlueIQ initiative, which has poured over R500 million into the rejuvenation of the downtown area. Nelson Mandela himself officially opened the bridge on 20 July 2003 – www. southafrica.net