AKANI MANGENA African Times News Digital Edition | www.africantimesnews.co.za | @AfricanTimesSA WORKERS affiliated to The National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union (NEHAWU) have vowed to continue with the pickets at the University of South Africa (UNISA) across the country after deadlocked wage negotiations between the national union and university management. The union members downed tools on Wednesday, which caused some campuses to close with scores of prospective students returning to their respective homes after denying access to register or apply for the academic year 2018. The union secretariat said their members at the university are “sick and tired” of being taken for granted by the university management and they are willing to go on a full blown strike indefinitely up until their demands are met. “Workers will not return to work until the university management sorts out the salary dispute and the absorption on a full time basis of all workers on contract since 2014 in the ICT department” Topping the list of their grievances, the union demands an across the board salary increase of 12%. While management is offering 6.5%, that all council members stop doing business with the university with immediate effect as they care less about the issues of workers but to corruptly milk the university. Nehawu, which is the largest affiliate to COSATU further demands that the university absorbs all contract workers with immediate effect and stop exploiting our members in the ICT department as per the amendments of the LRA. “Our view is that they are being disingenuous when they plead poverty. In this regard, the national union has taken a decision to go on a full blown strike in all campuses across the country until our demands are met.” the union said. The university have since advised students to resort to alternative methods to apply and register, which is online service. “Unisa is currently in the middle of a strike. While the negotiations are taking place, we encourage students to continue to apply and register online. Unisa will communicate soon regarding the days lost for applications and registrations.”