PICTURES of Mpumalanga’s Ndebele people often adorn posters and guidebooks to South Africa because of their dazzlingly painted traditional homesteads and colourful crafts. The Ndebele’s vivid geometric designs and striking traditional clothing are amongst Africa’s most eye-catching, as you’ll discover when you visit one of Mpumalanga’s Ndebele villages. The little town of Siyabuswa in Mpumalanga’s cultural heartland is home to the Kghodwana Cultural Village where you can follow the history over the last 1000 years of Ndebele history through to modern times. The people in this region are linguistically related to KwaZulu- Natal’s Zulu tribe and the Ndebele of Zimbabwe. Take a tour of the village; shop for stunning crafts such as bracelets, necklaces, mats woven from dry grass and beadwork-adorned gala blankets; visit one of the Royal Kraals and admire the heavy brass rings worn by married women around ankles and necks to display their wealth. It’s the Ndebele women who traditionally paint the vivid geometric designs of the homesteads, based on triangular and rectangular shapes. Skills are passed from mother to daughter, and the shapes used are often inspired by their intricately fashioned beadwork. Another Ndebele village well worth a visit is situated at the beautifully restored Botshabelo Mission Station, where early South African Christians sought refuge and found education training from the mid-1800s. This Ndebele village is an open-air living museum of vibrant colour. Admire the artwork of the huts, the glowing murals on internationally-acclaimed Ndebele artist, Esther Mahlangu’s family homestead, the beaded aprons of the little girls, the glowing colours of blankets and beadwork, and chat to the married women about their spectacular clothing. Thirsty after all this sightseeing? Then pop over to the Loopspruit Wine Estate – South Africa’s northernmost vineyard – just across the road from the village – www. southafrica.net Who to contact Kghodwana Cultural Village
Tel: +27 13 930 7046
Email: khobongo@mtg.gov.za
Botshabelo Mission Station
Tel: +27 13 245 9900/11 How to get there 29/10/2017 Minister of Tourism awards Lilizela Tourism Awards 2017 at Sandton Convention Centre Gauteng/; Esther Mahlangu/ Hall of Fame Kghodwana Cultural Village is 32km north of Bronkhorstspruit, about an hour’s drive from Johannesburg or Pretoria. To visit the Botshabelo Mission Station, take the N4 from Johannesburg or Pretoria, and then the R35 to Grobersdal. The Botshabelo sign is on the left, 12km from Middelburg. Best time to visit Kghodwana Cultural Village is open Monday to Friday from 8am – 4pm. Botshabelo Mission Station is open from 6am – 6pm daily. Where to stay There are self-catering units at Botshabelo. What to eat Kghodwana Cultural Village will provide a traditional Ndebele meal if ordered at least three days in advance. Best buys Some of South Africa’s most colourful beadwork, arts and crafts. Did You Know? The present Ndebele king, Makhoswonke ll, is one of South Africa’s undisputed monarchs.