Pilot features some of biggest names on South African television. KARABO NGOEPE SOUTH African actress Thuso Mbedu is reaching for the stars and continuing with her meteoric rise to stardom. The Emmy Award-nominated actress took to social media to drop the trailer for the pilot of a series she is working on titled iDrive. On one of the videos posted on Instagram, Mbedu expressed gratitude to the people who worked with her to make the series possible and said she would be pushing to get it on air. It hasn’t been commissioned yet by any station but the actress was adamant about changing that. “Thank you to those who have shown nothing but love and have given suggestions/recommendations as to where we can go for funding… to my fellow creatives: if I can do it, so can you. Collaborate and be great. Let’s inspire each other and make magic,” she said. The pilot features some of South Africa’s television hard hitters such as Sdumo Mtshali and Bohang Moeko. She said she was excited about the project and couldn’t wait for the rest of the country to see it. South Africans showed her love and encouraged her to keep working and shooting for the stars. Phil Mphela said Mbedu was taking matters into her own hands and not waiting for big productions to give her a role, she was instead creating one for herself. “#AwesomeNews: Emmy nominated SA actress @ThusoMbedu has created a new series, iDrive. If they dont hire you, create work for yourself! #iDriveSeries stars @ SdumoMtshali, @ThusoMbedu & @Bohang The series hasnt been picked by a channel yet. I love this. Performers taking control of their creative work. Remember Thuso shared how she hadnt worked since June after shooting Isthunzi. Well, she has created an opportunity for herself & her friends. I hope she can find sponsors & not have to give ownership of the show away,” he said on his Twitter page. Mmaboshadi Chauke said: “Wow! Wow! Wow! @ThusoMbedu this looks amazing! I wish you every bit of success in getting it onto a Free-to-air channel so the entire nation can see your excellence! Well done!” Portia Ngcobo posted: “Thuso is going very far! A dynamite of note” Towards the end of 2017, Mbedu was nominated in the International Emmys’ Best Performance by an Actress category, for her role as Winnie in the drama series “Is’thunzi”. She, however, revealed that she had been struggling to get work since the series ended. This despite having backed the nomination and international recognition.