KARABO NGOEPE PRESIDENT Jacob Zuma’s fate seems to be sealed following a meeting with African National Congress President Cyril Ramaphosa on Tuesday. Ramaphosa on Wednesday broke his silence regarding the behind the scenes meetings that have been taking place. Ramaphosa on Wednesday released a statement indicating that they have had direct discussions on Tuesday night on the transition and matters relating to Zuma’s position as the President of the Republic. Late on Tuesday, the party announced the postponement of a special National Executive Committee (NEC) meeting that would have been used to discuss Zuma’s future. Ramaphosa said the postponement was due to the constructiveness of the meeting with Zuma. “The discussions were constructive and lay the basis for a speedy resolution of the matter in the interests of the country and its people. On the basis of the progress made, it was agreed to postpone a special meeting of the ANC National Executive Committee that had been scheduled for later today (Wednesday). This will enable President Zuma and myself to conclude our discussions and report back to our organisation and the country in the coming days,” he said. SEALED: President Jacob Zuma’s resignation seems imminent after his meeting with ANC President Cyril Ramaphosa. Photo Denvor de Wee / Visual Buzz SA Speculation has been rife regarding Zuma’s removal from the highest office in the land but past meetings have not yielded the required results. It has been widely reported that Zuma has been digging in his heels and making “unreasonable” demands before stepping down as the president of the country. Ramaphosa said he was aware that the uncertainty surrounding the position of the Head of State and Government was a cause for concern among many South Africans. In what could be interpreted as a hint to Zuma’s exit, Ramaphosa said the process would address concerns and pave the way for the country to be united once concluded. “I am certain that the process we have now embarked on will achieve an outcome that not only addresses these concerns but also unites our people around the tasks that all of us must necessarily undertake to build our country. We will be able to communicate further on President Zuma’s position as President of the Republic once we have finalised all pertinent matters,” said Ramaphosa. He added that while the process has led to the postponement of the State of the Nation Address which was scheduled for Thursday, the work of government and Parliament would continue. Ramaphosa said they were working towards giving South Africans closure. “This is a challenging time for our country. Both President Zuma and myself are aware that our people want and deserve closure. The constructive process we have embarked on offers the greatest opportunity to conclude this matter without discord or division. Throughout this process, I am guided by the principle that the interests and needs of the South African people are paramount,” he said.