Some call for ban of movie exposing Xhosa traditions. THE movie, Inxeba (The Wound) has the country divided with others calling for its boycott over what has been described as an insult to the Xhosa and African tradition of initiation. The movie has received backlash from the Xhosa community since its release, despite having picked up 19 awards before it hit the cinemas. Musician Loyiso Bala is one of the people that has bashed the producers and creators of the movie for exposing Xhosa traditions which he believes should be sacred. Bala who admitted to not having seen the movies called for the film to be banned, saying it ridicules and disrespects the traditions of the Xhosa culture. “The release of ‘Inxeba’ totally ridicules and disrespects the wishes and traditions of the Xhosa culture. “If we, as a country, cannot protect our own cultural beliefs and differences, no one else will do it for us,” he said on Twitter. “As a Christian, I would not depict a picture of the Muslim Prophet Mohammed. “Not because I believe in the reasons behind it, but because I respect the wishes of the Muslim community. Why when it comes to our own traditions, we can’t give each other the same respect? #BanInxeba.” He was however taken to task by tweeps who are for the movie. They said there was nothing new that was revealed by the movie. Some cinemas have been shut down and others have decided to remove it from the circuit after staff members and patrons were threatened if the movie was played. Inxeba tells the story of Xolani, a factory worker who joins the men of his community in the mountain of the Eastern Cape to initiate a group of teenage boys into manhood. His life changes and is thrown into tatters when an initiate from the city discovers Xolani’s secret, that he is gay. The Congress of Traditional Leaders of South Africa (Contralesa) has also joined the fray, claiming that the movie is an inaccurate depiction of isiXhosa culture and rituals. Contralesa claims that the movie depicts the traditional rite of passage as space where young men are taught indecency. Prince Abongile Ngozi said although the Constitution of the country allows for freedom of expression and they respect that, the movie is, however, an infringement on customs and Xhosa culture. “We have written to these people countless times to come and engage so that we may find common ground on how we can best assist them in depicting our culture and telling this story,” he said. As the outrage continues to pick up momentum in the country, the producers of the film have approached the Human Rights Commission and Commission of Gender Equality to lay a charge. The creators have also hit back at those opposing it. Director John Trengrove has accused those of protesting the film of double standards. He questioned why those people remain silent when atrocious acts take place in the country but find the courage to protest over a movie. “Who are these men protesting #Inxeba? It’s just a film! Where are they when women and children are raped in our communities? Where are they when gays and lesbians are murdered in our streets? “Shame on them for wasting time protesting a film when there is real work to be done,” he said.