MASHUDU SADIKE and PIET RAMPEDI LIMPOPO Sports MEC Onnica Moloi is in hot water for alleged misconduct, belittling ANC deployment and undermining the party’s social standing. Provincial Secretary Soviet Lekganyane says he will summon Moloi to the party’s provincial headquarters, Frans Mohlala, to explain why she publicly denounced the “so-called blue lights” and announced her alleged resignation as MEC on social media over the weekend. He described the former ANC Youth League (ANCYL) leader’s behavior as disappointing and devoid of integrity for a leader of a party whose forebears – such as Nelson Mandela, Lilian Ngoyi and Charlotte Maxeke – were historically known for their high moral and social standing. It’s not clear what triggered Moloi’s outburst, but sources say it could have been caused by a bitter fall out with senior ANC leaders that she blames for her failure to be elected onto the provincial executive committee of the party’s 9th elective conference held in Polokwane at the weekend. In a Facebook post, Moloi wrote that: “Dear Masana Bishops don’t worry; we will send our resignation letters and hand over your so called ‘blue lights’ by Friday to make your job easy. We didn’t join the ANC for Blue lights.” Her account was later deactivated. Masana is the name of a lodge in Polokwane where most caucuses of the ANC leaders in the Peter Mokaba region were held ahead of the provincial conference. While she did not mention the “Masana Bishops” by names, sources claimed she was referring to Lekganyane, Limpopo ANC treasurer Danny Msiza and Capricorn District Mayor John Mpe. Two sources, including a PEC member, say Moloi allegedly believes the trio orchestrated her exclusion from the powerful body that runs the affairs of the ANC in Limpopo, thus weakening her politically and making her vulnerable to a cabinet reshuffle. Lekganyane told African Times on Tuesday night that the ANC took serious exception to Moloi’s conduct. “The phrase so-called blue light is belittling. You can’t belittle a deployment. You know deployment is a recognition of the highest order because the people of Limpopo said, we think you can be something here. If you think you have served it’s enough, you call a press conference and say to us, I want to thank you so much,” Lekganyane said. “So, we will still as the ANC establish the context under which such statements were made without being judgmental of course. We will request the comrade to the office, the comrade will explain, maybe she has a point.” Without getting into the merits and demerits of Moloi’s case, Lekganyane says it’s important for leaders to not succumb to social media “frenzy and excitement” and end us saying things that will come back to haunt them. “The behaviour of the comrade, I don’t think it has been better under the circumstances. If you remember, there was a video that went viral where she was telling someone that they were exercising and the bums of some people remained loose while those of others were tight. So, it just shows how dangerous that space can be,” Lekganyane added. “There is no way we can’t be disappointed as the ANC because our organisation, historically, is an organisation of high moral aptitude, an organisation of reputation. You can look at the pictures of Nelson Mandela, Walter Sisulu and Oliver Tambo. You have never seen Tambo wearing shots in any photos. The women who led the ANC, your Lilian Ngoyi and Charlotte Maxeke, have always been women of impeccable record of high moral and social standing. I think we must never lose sight of that.” Lekganyane, however, says he is not aware of Moloi’s alleged resignation. “It has not come to our attention as the African National Congress. I don’t know if the premier’s office knows about it. But there is one thing we must condemn. A leader of the ANC must exhibit integrity.” Limpopo Premier Stan Mathabatha Spokesperson Kenny Mativha says while Moloi insists she has resigned, he is treating it as a rumour until a letter to that affect can be seen. “We can’t confirm out of certainty because when you resign from the executive there are several processes we have to go with and you have to indicate whether you are resigning from being an MEC or from being a member of the legislature or from being a member of the ANC so to us that is still a rumour,” said Mathivha. “She says that she has sent a letter to the Premier, but understanding that the Premier has not been to the office because of the heavy schedule of the conference. Part of it cannot be processed if indeed there is a letter within this week because we are dealing with the funeral of Mama Joyce Mashamba and not with resignations.” Moloi could not be reached for comment as her phone rang unanswered. Her spokesperson, Moloko Moloto, refused to comment citing unresolved issues with African Times. “We have taken a decision that we are not going to be cooperating with you guys because your newspaper has been very unfair on us. So we are no longer going to be commenting with your newspaper in particular and I have advised the MEC as her spokesperson not to give you a comment,” said Moloto.