MASHUDU SADIKE Department of Co-operative Governance, Human Settlements and Traditional Affairs (CoGHSTA) in Limpopo brought joy to three elderly residents of Nancefield in Musina Limpopo when they handed over RDP houses as part of Youth Month celebrations. CoGHSTA, National Department of Human Settlement and the Musina Municipality in the Vhembe District have partnered on an annual Youth Build program aimed at sensitising the youth on the effects of drug use. The program also tackles the housing backlog by handing over RDP houses to those in need. This is a partnership project of the Department of Human Settlement with sector stakeholders, it is hosted annually in one or more provinces to commemorate the Youth Month Youth Build entails construction of housing units for the vulnerable and marginalized groups such as the elderly, people with disabilities, women caring for orphans and vulnerable children. Speaking on behalf of CoGHSTA MEC Jerry Ndou, Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on CoGHSTA, Mokgadi Aphiri, said that youth participation in the economy through human settlements programs gives young people a chance in life. “The triple challenges of poverty, inequality and unemployment continue to be a challenge in the country even though government is doing everything to make sure that an enabling environment is achieved for citizens to improve their lives,” she said. She added that lack of skills where job and economic opportunities exit, proved to be a huge challenge, mentioning that the youth charter states an importance in training young people in disciplines where opportunities were available. For the 2018 Limpopo Youth Build, the elderly beneficiaries for the first time received keys to their houses that are plastered with painted interior and exterior, cobbling on the windows, curtain rails and curtains. The houses will also include polished floors and tiled floors. The National Department of Housing is said to deliver furniture for the houses. One of the beneficiaries, 81 year old Koko Elisa Mokwena, who has two dependants counting on her old age grant, could not hide her jubilation after receiving her house. “I used to live in my son’s shack with my two grandchildren. I am relieved because I applied for an RDP house 30 years ago with no progress at all, seeing this happening now brings me joy,” said Koko Elisa with a smile. Musina Municipality Mayor, Mihloti Muhlophe thanked the efforts of CoHGSTA and the DHS saying that it was exemplary to community members to support the older generation. “This program also deals with the issue of drug abuse and engages the young people about drugs and that the South African Police Services (SAPS) will take charge and arrests those that deal with drugs in our schools,” she concluded.