MASHUDU SADIKE Blouberg Local Municipality in Limpopo is to benefit more and easily access water with the recently signed Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between Capricorn District Municipality (CDM) and mining company Waterberg JV Resources. In an attempt to fulfil the mandate given to CDM by the National Water Act and Water Services Act to identify and use reliable water sources, Executive Mayor John Mpe has gone to bed with Waterberg JV Resources on a Strategic Partnership towards Water Projects in a five year deal. According to Mpe, the Municipality and the mine will work together in this venture as the mine was tasked to establish a technical committee. Specialists will also be appointed to conduct ground water testing and feasibility studies, drill boreholes and prepare technical designs. Some of the villages to benefit from this union in the Blouberg Municipality are Lewaneng, Goedetrou, Early Dawn, Norma A and B and surrounding settlements in the municipality in efforts to improve household portable water. Speaking to the a press at Mayors headquarters last week, Mpe said the municipality had to ensure that there was equitable provision and supply of bulk and portable water to households for drinking and for industrial usage to mining and agriculture. “It is important that agricultural sector takes about 70% of our water usage while other economic sectors such as mining share the remaining 30% with households for domestic use. To achieve our 2040 Vision in basic services, we need to reverse these water supply imbalances and ensure equitable provision of water to households, mining and agriculture,” Mpe said. Mpe announced that they would be working with mining company Waterberg JV Resources in a partnership because they share the same vision with the municipality as the water service authority. “As the water services authority, we are always open and looking for partnerships with institutions that are like-minded and share the same vision as ours. In order to double our efforts and expertise in addressing backlogs of water supply we are pleased that Waterberg JV Resources has strategically partnered with us in harvesting water not only for benefit of their mining operations, but also the local municipality. “Like any other capital project, we will work closely with our communities, traditional authorities in those areas and any other interested parties will be involved to support this partnership,” said Mpe. Mpe was confident that the partnership would result into a project that would go a long way in improving the lives of community members in those areas. “It is our wish to reach as many households as possible and improve the overall household access to portable water. With limited funds and competing service delivery priorities, we may take a while to clear all the backlogs. But, with partnerships such as this we can do more to change lives of many,” he said. Mpe commended Waterberg JR Resources for going on board on this strategic partnership to complement CDM’s efforts to improve household’s portable water.