AKANI CHAUKE THE retail oil sector is being positioned as a pioneer in mobile-based customer convenience in Africa following the availability of an international fuel payment system developed in South Africa. Payment 24, a ground-breaking fuel management solution and mobile app, will be to one of the world’s leading oil companies’ customers on their smartphones, allowing them to quickly and easily pay for fuel at over 600 filling stations across the Southern African country. The platform enables petroleum firms to enhance efficiencies, reduce the risk of losses due to incorrect grades of fuel being billed, and eliminate the risks of payment fraud or errors at the pump. The app also positions the companies to enhance its ‘know your customer’ initiatives and lays the foundation for mobile-based loyalty programmes, promotions and referral programmes. For motorists, the new app will offer simpler, more secure payment at the pump. Using the app, motorists are geolocated at the filling station and simply input the pump number to authorise filling up and payment. Limits can be predetermined, and multiple family members or employees can be managed from a single dashboard, allowing the account owner to track and manage fuel expenses. Nolan Daniels and Shadab Rahil, joint Chief Executive Officers of Payment24, said the app had gained significant traction in the market and was in use by major fleet owners and organisations across Africa and abroad. In Africa, Payment24 lists the United Nations headquarters in Ethiopia and Standard Bank in Namibia as clients. “Expanding on our growth in the fuel and transport sectors, our partnership with this oil company takes the advanced payment solution to the mobile phones of consumers and small business owners for the first time,” said Rahil. Rahil said South African consumers and small business owners can now use this advanced fuel management and payment solution to reserve funds for fuel, speed up the payment process, control and track fuel expenditure by family members and employees, manage accounts and generate logs. In Payment24 pilot projects, customers reported a significantly improved experience and appreciated not having to hand over credit or debit cards or carry cash for fuel purchases. Daniel said the mobile app reduced the cost and complexity of managing payment terminals on the forecourt, cut the cost per transaction, enhanced payment security and reduced time at the pumps. By ensuring only the correct grade of fuel is authorised, petrol grade errors, traditionally a significant expense item, are reduced. “And because the platform is so convenient, app users tend to return to the same petroleum brand time and again,” Daniel said. – CAJ News