MASHUDU SADIKE LIMPOPO police have launched a man-hunt for a group of armed men who carried out the latest cash-in-transit heist in the country, before walking away with undisclosed amount of money. A gang of about 10 men fired gunshots at an SBV vehicle on the Matlala road outside Polokwane this morning, injuring one of the security guards, police said. They shot out car tyres until the security vehicle transporting money was forced to ground to a halt. The robbers then fled in a white Isuzu bakkie and a blue Rav Four at about 05:30 this morning, said provincial police spokesperson Lieutenant-Colonel Moatshe Ngoepe. BRAZEN ROBBERY: A cash in transit heist on the Matlala Road in Polokwane. Photo: Lebogang Makwela/Visual Buzz SA. “The culprits held the security officers at gunpoint and used explosives to blast open the safe before fleeing the scene with an undisclosed amount of money. Two of the security officers sustained injuries and were taken to hospital for medical attention,” said Ngoepe. One security guard was injured and is currently in medical care. He said the road was blocked off for several hours while police combed the scene for clue. Traffic was redirected to nearby villages in the area which is about 15 kilometres outside the city. According to Ngoepe, Provincial Police Commissioner Lieutenant General Nneke Ledwaba has since put together a dedicated joint task team to hunt the armed suspects down. This is the latest cash in transit heist to hit the country in recent weeks. Several robberies have taken place in areas such as Boksburg and the N3 near Edenvale in Gauteng, among others. Undisclosed amounts of money were stolen in the process. This led to the security companies’ personnel threatening to strike on the 11 of June if the nothing is done to curb the situation. “Anyone with information which can lead to their arrest may contact Captain Richard Boshomane at 079 894 5501; the crime stop number 0860010111; the crime line SMS 32211 or the nearest police station,” Ngoepe concluded.  Meanwhile, a security guard has been shot and wounded during an attack on a cash van in Centurion near Pretoria on Monday afternoon. It’s understood that at least four gunmen ambushed the van as it arrived to collect money at the Celtisdal Shopping Centre. ER24’s Russel Meiring says one of the guards was shot in the leg during the crime and is recovering in hospital. “He was treated by paramedics and provided with pain relief medication before he was transported by another service to a nearby hospital. A pregnant woman was also assessed by ER 24 paramedics. Assessments showed that the women had escaped injuries although she was visibly shaken, she was later transported to a nearby hospital.” Experts believe most of the heists are an inside job carried out with the help of guards who are unhappy with their salaries.