THE SACP has called for a female premier in Limpopo, boosting the chances of a woman leading the province for the first time since 1994. It has also raised concerns about the alleged irregularities and financial mismanagement at Roads Agency Limpopo (RAL), saying swift action is needed to deal with such a “self-created crisis”. However, the communist party’s call for a female premier is likely to put it on a collision course with Premier Stan Mathabatha’s supporters who are banking on his second term. In its post Provincial Working Committee (PWC) statement released this week, the party denounced as “unacceptable” and “a scandal” the fact that men have led Limpopo since the dawn of democracy. They are former premiers Ngoako Ramatlhodi, Sello Moloto, Cassel Mathale and Mathabatha. “We reiterate our position that we are looking forward to the first woman premier for Limpopo province after the 2019 General Elections. Limpopo is one of the only two provinces that never had a female premier since 1994 democratic breakthrough,” said Provincial Secretary in a statement. “It is unacceptable, unjustifiable and a scandal that we continue to have male premiers for almost a quarter of a century in a province where an overwhelming majority of the population are females. This does not augur well for the struggle for gender equality, emancipation of women and destruction of patriarchy.” At least four women are seen as contenders for the province’s top job. They are deputy provincial ANC chairperson and Vhembe Mayor Florence Radzilani, Transport MEC Makoma Makhurupetje, Health MEC Dr Phophi Ramathuba and Provincial Executive Committee (PEC) member Rosina Mogotlane. The ANC national executive committee (NEC) will decide on who becomes premier after receiving three recommended names from the PEC. Kganyago said RAL would not be able to finish the roads it had started or build new ones because it had over-committed by R4 billion. Describing the roads agency’s situation as “dire”, the SACP called for a “swift and decisive” action from the ANC-led Alliance and the government. “We call on those involved to act with deserved speed and seriousness to address this unpalatable and unpardonable self-created crisis. Delivery of better roads for our people cannot be postponed any longer. Strong and ruthless action must be taken swiftly against those involved. We are watching this development with Hawks eye,” he added.On the latest crime statistics, the SACP said it was disappointed that the province got an increase of almost all categories of serious and violent crimes. “There has been an increase of car hijackings by 27.2%, robberies of residential properties increased by 26.2%, truck hijacking increased by 18.5%, murder increased by 10.9%, murder by 12.1%, stock theft increased by 11.8%, cash in transit robberies increased by 10.9%, attempted increased by 6.6%, robbery with aggravating circumstances increased by 0,9%. This is totally unacceptable and calls for immediate action by government and the communities of Limpopo,” said Kganyago. He called on the government to act swiftly to stop the further slide of the economy following revelations by Stats SA that the country was in a technical recession. “They must do everything to ensure the poor are cushioned from the negative consequences of this recession.”