Capricorn District Municipality (CDM) mayor John Mpe says at least 5000 households have access to running as a result of projects in the municipality. Addressing an Imbizo at Ga-Kibi in Blouberg, Mpe gave a service delivery report highlighting the work done by the municipality. “This Imbizo give us as an opportunity to appropriately respond to the central question in the mind of our people as to what are we doing as the Capricorn District to ensure that our people receive basic service delivery with no interruptions and other hindrances. The occasion also gives our people an opportunity to raise challenging issues on service delivery that they’re faced with, issues that present a programme of action to guide our financial commitments every year,” Mpe said. His report stated that one of the projects was the Blackhill Water Scheme, supplying water to Blackhill, Brana, Mangalo, Lekgwara, Hlako, Mampote and Dithabaneng villages benefitting about 3490 households. He said that one portion of the project was worth R25- Million while the other was R22-Million creating close to 100 jobs and the project was on-going. “This project is still under construction, however, the contractor delayed in attending to the snag list and a warning letter was issued to them and so they Contractor is currently on-site attending to the outstanding items,” said Mpe. Amongst other projects, the mayor gave a report on were Lethaleng, Puraspan (Ga-Machaba) Ext water supply, Letswatla water supply, Slaaphoek water supply, Sadu water supply, Senwabarwana water supply, Lethaleng, Puraspan (Ga-Machaba) Ext Water Supply and Essorinca (Mmaijang) water supply. The mayor promised to identify and use reliable water sources to ensure equitable provision and supply of bulk and portable water to households for drinking and for industrial usage to mining and agriculture as mandated by the National Water Act and Water Services Act. “This is because water is central to economic development and the sustenance of human life and we are always open and looking for partnerships with institutions that are like-minded and share the same vision as ours in order to double our efforts and expertise in addressing backlogs of water supply, especially in rural areas. CDM has signed the MOU [Memorundum of Understanding] with Waterberg JV Resources Pty Ltd mines. We have strategically partnered with them in harvesting water not only for the benefit of their mining operations but also the local community in Lewaneng, Goedetrouw (Kgatlu), Early Dawn, Norma A and B and surrounding settlements in Blouberg Local Municipality,” Mpe said. He added that the district still encountered challenges such as ageing infrastructure, water scarcity, 80% of the district population that depended on groundwater source more especially in Blouberg Municipality, the growth patterns of the villages continued to cause the imbalance between water demand and water supply. “In order for Capricorn District Municipality to achieve its vision where every household enjoys a decent standard of living that water gives, we must expedite water supply and maintain the infrastructure that enables that supply all of us. Let us own these projects and working collectively,” he said in closing.